---
title: "Marginal structural Cox model to estimate the causal effect of clinical mastitis on Québec dairy cow culling risk"
subtitle: 
date: 2017-09-20
comments: false
---

### D Haine, H Delgado, R Cue, A Sewalem, K Wade, R Lacroix, D Lefebvre, J Arsenault, É Bouchard, J Dubuc

Health disorders, such as milk fever, displaced abomasum, or retained placenta,
as well as poor reproductive performance, are known risk factors for culling in
dairy cows. Clinical mastitis (CM) is one of the most influential culling risk
factors. However the culling decision could be based either on the disease
status or on the current milk yield, milk production being a significant
confounder when modelling dairy cow culling risk. But milk yield (and somatic
cell count) are time-varying confounders, which are also affected by prior CM
and therefore lie on the causal pathway between the exposure of interest, CM,
and the outcome, culling. Including these time-varying confounders could result
in biased estimates. A marginal structural model (MSM) is a statistical
technique allowing estimation of the causal effect of a time-varying exposure in
the presence of time-varying covariates without conditioning on these
covariates. The objective of this paper is to estimate the causal effect on
culling of CM occurring between calving and 120 days in milk, using MSM to
control for such time-varying confounders affected by previous exposure. A
retrospective longitudinal study was conducted on data from dairy herds in the
Province of Québec, Canada, by extracting health information events from the
dairy herd health management software used by most Québec dairy producers and
their veterinarians. The data were extracted for all lactations starting between
January 1 and December 31, 2010. A total of 3,952 heifers and 8,724 cows from
261 herds met the inclusion criteria and were used in the analysis.
The estimated CM causal hazard ratios were 1.96 [1.57--2.45] and 1.47
[1.28--1.69] for heifers and cows, respectively, and as long as causal
assumptions hold. Our findings confirm that CM was a risk factor for culling,
but with a reduced effect compared to previous studies, which did not properly
control for the presence of time-dependent confounders such as milk yield and
somatic cell count. Cows experienced a lower risk for CM, with milk production
having more influence on culling risk in cows than heifers.

[**In Preventive Veterinary Medicine**](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167587716307243)

Paper [here](/pdf/haine2017a.pdf).
